I’d like to share with you
one of my first written plays
so that I can tell you
how my writing process was
until I reached
the first draft or final draft.
I think this play
is somehow personal for me
because...
it discusses identity
and how I realized
it wasn’t only me.
There was a time, of course,
I think it’s probably
common for gay people,
that they don’t
immediately “come out”
because it depends on their family,
on how open or supportive
a family is with their children’s identity.
And I happened to belong
to a not-so-supportive side at that time.
I’ve forgiven
my parents, by the way.
And I love my mother.
It’s kind of like...
one of the plays
which I really based
from personal experience.
Partly, from my personal experience,
there’s just one scene that I used
but it’s more of a
collective experience
of a group that I joined
when I was starting to discover
being open as a gay person.
I joined a small group at PETA
and other friends from PETA joined
and we shared our experiences
about coming out and living as gay people,
some partly open,
some partly closeted.
The group got bigger
and that’s where I based my materials.
The truth is I wasn’t
supposed to write it.
PETA commissioned it,
and they commissioned
one person from the group.
But that person wasn’t able to do it
so it fell on my lap.
And I started interviewing
former seminarists,
people who worked
in the business sector.
Especially at that time,
gay people weren’t that open
and back then
it could affect careers.
It could greatly affect
a corporate person
who was climbing up the ladder.
Those are the collective experiences
that I’ve included in the play.
I found the connecting link or the hook
because
first of all
I liked Diana Ross.
I don’t know
if you’re familiar with Diana Ross,
you can google that.
I know there are kids these days
who don’t recognize her
and her songs anymore.
But at that time,
Diana Ross was such
a huge gay icon.
There were three actually:
Diana Ross, Barbara Streisand, and Liza Minnelli.
You go to any gay bar then
and they were the ones being
impersonated by performers.
You can't perform one
without the other.
So Diana Ross was a perfect...
conceit for the whole play.
And when I “found” her,
I was able to write the play quickly.
The story developed faster
when I "found"
the connecting link.
I included Diana in the story
as the alter ego
of the main character,
who happens to be Andy,
which is an anagram somehow.
I mean phonetically of Diana.
Diana, Andy.
So that’s the name
of the main character.
I focused on five scenes
about his life.
From his childhood
to his becoming a seminarist,
to becoming engaged
and then married,
but in love with a man.
Until he committed suicide,
and finally, at the hospital.
So those five stories,
those five scenes,
not acts, just scenes
told the story of coming out
and the pain of coming out
as a gay person living
in a limiting environment.
I initially chose the songs
that Diana Ross would sing
in order to enhance the story
or for the opening
and closing of a scene.
I also used the songs
as commentary on the obstacles
that the main character faces.
I was a big fan of Diana Ross,
but during rehearsals,
It turned out, the director Soxie Topacio
was an even bigger fan than I was
and he had a complete
collection of Diana Ross.
He was able to screen the songs
that were more appropriate for the play.
Basically, that’s what
the play went through.
It’s not only the story
of one person.
The story of exorcism,
that’s my story.
Other scenes came from
the different people that I interviewed
so I guess the play was formed
through the interviews.
What I’m trying
to say here is that
even if I had relevant experiences
it’s still important for me
to hear other gay people’s voices,
in order to enrich,
deepen, and layer
the experiences that the
character went through,
and to reach out
to more audiences,
At the same time,
I anchored on an environment
that’s common knowledge
to ordinary people,
whether gay or straight.
Diana Ross’ songs
helped me form the structure.
So read the play and
give your comments
if it’s okay.
The title is “How I Killed Diana Ross”.